Thank you all very much.
It's a pleasure to have you all here.
This is session 104,
the affectionately titled
Mac OS X Overview for UNIX Geeks.
So first question is,
how many UNIX geeks do
we have in the audience?
OK, if you're looking for the 'how
to make nice pretty pictures',
you're in the wrong place.
My name is Ernest Prabhakar.
I'm the product line manager
for Development Platforms.
I'm part of the
Mac OS X product marketing team.
I consider our group the
people who do geek stuff.
We make the tools that people like you,
that our developers need to create
great apps for our mutual customers.
That's responsible for the Java runtime,
the WebObjects application server,
our development tools,
but in particular our open
source and UNIX technologies.
I've been working on UNIX since the days
of BSC 4.2 back at MIT and very excited
to see a platform that really exemplifies
the dreams for what I and many others
in the UNIX community have been seeking.
One of the main purposes for this
orientation is for people who
have not been very familiar with
Mac OS X or the Mac platform.
How many of you were not
using a Mac a year ago?
Just getting a feel for, okay,
pretty good representation.
How many of you have been
using Mac OS X for a long time?
How many of you have been using
Mac OS X for less than three months?
Any, a few new people here?
Okay, very good.
So a lot of you probably have been using
Mac OS X in various capacities over time.
The real focus was primarily focusing on
UNIX developers who are new to the Mac.
People who may have used a Mac only
casually or may not have been using
Mac OS X or importantly may not
have developed on Mac OS X even
if they've used it casually.
And there's a lot of culture and
history behind Mac OS X that affects
some of the decisions we made.
And in case you're a little disoriented
by some of those terms or concepts,
this is the place to try to
help you get those answers.
And in particular,
we want to help you get the
most out of this conference.
How many of you,
is this your first developers conference?
Well, that's great.
Really exciting to see all these people
coming in to experience Mac OS X.
We want to help you get the
most out of the conference,
give you some suggestions of
the different events going on
that may be of interest to you,
and also give you a
chance to ask questions.
It's just a fairly brief
presentation all told.
We want to have lots
of time for questions.
I'll have some of the
engineers up here with me.
To make sure that any dumb questions you
don't want to ask because you thought
everyone else would know the answer,
this is your chance to ask them.
So what we're going to cover
is a number of things here.
First of all,
the architecture of Mac OS X.
Just a quick overview for those of you
who haven't seen the history of it.
The names and history of the
key technology components.
What's the difference between
a Carbon and a Cocoa in
a classic application?
Some correspondence between what we do
in Mac OS X and what you may be used
to from your previous UNIX platforms.
Some high-level differences
from those systems,
as well as the roadmap.
So I want to start with some history
about how we got to Mac OS X.
So this, of course,
is the picture that you've
always seen a lot of,
of the face of Mac OS X.
And we talk about the power of
UNIX and the simplicity of Macintosh.
But for people coming
from a UNIX background,
you often see it as the simplicity
of UNIX and the power of Macintosh.
Right?
It's the idea that people who
think of UNIX as simple... How many
people think of UNIX as simple?
Right?
That's a very different perspective
than the typical Macintosh
user or Macintosh developer.
[Transcript missing]
So we see this is coming together not
just of technologies but also of people.
Obviously the Macintosh faithful,
people who have been on
the Mac platform for years,
stuck with us through thick and thin,
in really core markets where the Mac has
always had a really compelling advantage.
Among certain segments
of the consumer space,
creative professionals,
design and publishing, small businesses,
and particularly educators and students.
At the same time,
we see this opening the door
to a whole new range of people,
probably many of you,
people who really love UNIX.
These are people doing
animation in movie studios,
scientists and engineers doing research,
in-house developers doing
UNIX or even Java applications,
and of course the whole
open source community.
We want to make Mac OS X not
just the best operating
system for existing customers,
as we were focusing on last year,
but the best platform for
UNIX users and UNIX developers.
[Transcript missing]
This was a conscious realization
that our customer base had changed.
We would never have conceived
of something like that in
the Mac OS 8 or 9 days.
But because we realized
that Mac OS X would appeal
to people like yourselves,
and blurring the line between
an end user and a developer,
we wanted to take advantage of that
opportunity to make those tools
available to people like yourselves.
And then, of course,
the big day in January when
we made Mac OS X the default
on all of our hardware.
So it's been almost a four year
journey to get to this point.
Actually, four years ago at the
developer conference when
we first launched Mac OS X,
we've gone through two major updates,
starting in our third here.
We're very excited about really starting
to take this to the UNIX community.
Now, why are we interested in doing this?
One is because we're able to bring
stuff to the UNIX community that
they've rarely seen or had a hard time
running on traditional UNIX platforms.
That's productivity software, games,
digital lifestyle applications,
media players, all sorts of things that,
quote unquote,
normal platforms use all the time,
but are hard to get on UNIX.
You either have to emulate
something or dual boot,
etc.
We want to have all that stuff available
for people in a true UNIX environment.
We're also excited, of course,
because this gives us all sorts
of wonderful things that we've
never had on the Mac or were very
hard for us to get on the Mac.
Viridian's developer tools
for optimized profiling,
scientific software written in Fortran,
visualization technology like Maya,
scalable network services like Samba,
all sorts of great things that
are sort of taken for granted
in the UNIX community and very
hard to get on the Macintosh.
One of my favorite examples of things
that we've been able to get because
of our UNIX foundation is MATLAB.
They had a press release just
yesterday that we've been
looking for for a long time,
a very powerful engineering
solution now available on Mac OS,
well, not quite yet available,
but coming available in large
part because of the ease of doing
UNIX-based development on Mac OS X.
So it's a whole new world for us
in terms of customers and solutions
that we're able to provide.
So at this point, I'd like to go over the
Mac OS X architecture diagram.
How many of you have never seen sort of
an architectural walkthrough of Mac OS X?
Has everyone seen an architectural
walkthrough of Mac OS X?
Okay, I'll go over this fairly quickly,
but I also want to share,
I've been involved with this
process for the last four years,
talk about some of the choices we made,
why we did things,
how this may impact what
you do in your work.
The key thing about this architecture,
which I think distinguishes it from
other attempts to make a usable UNIX,
is we really want to make
a modular architecture.
This allows us to do things at the
bottom level without having to rewrite
everything at the higher layers.
It enabled Mac OS X to
succeed where previous events,
attempts at next generation
operating systems had failed.
But it also allows us to
innovate more rapidly.
And by understanding which layer
you're working on in Mac OS X,
you're able to work more rapidly,
more efficiently,
and yet still be able to access the
power and functionality that you need.
In particular,
this also allows us to open source
the lower layers of the system while
still retaining higher value add pieces
that we can sell commercially and
pay engineers to do more cool stuff.
It also enables us to support legacy
technology in a modular way without
having to pollute our APIs or
break compatibility in many cases.
It also allows us as Apple to
coordinate multiple small teams.
So we can have teams working on
different technology which may not
be known to the rest of the company.
Things like iChat,
which we released or announced yesterday,
without having to worry about the
entire system having to deal with it.
Although obviously there are
cases where that happens.
And more importantly,
it allows us to hide complexity
from users and developers.
One of the big challenges in UNIX is
you pretty much had to see everything.
And it was great that
you could see everything.
But there was times where you would not
want to see everything or in particular
end users do not want to see everything.
This layered architecture
allows certain developers,
our traditional Mac developers,
our Macintosh end users,
to experience the benefits of all that
complexity and power without having
to manage that complexity themselves.
A lot of that complexity that people
worry about from the non-traditional
UNIX community is the foundation,
which we call Darwin.
Darwin is the core
foundation of Mac OS X.
We actually use it to refer
to a family of technologies:
the kernel, the libraries,
the network services,
and the command environment,
what we call user space sometimes.
And all of that is part of Darwin.
It's all open source.
It's all available as part of Mac OS X,
but invisible to the casual user.
And of course it's all the standard
stuff you expect from UNIX,
right?
All the utilities, editors,
and programming languages you expect,
a full terminal environment.
But importantly,
it also provides the capability for
third parties to add other things that
we don't ship as part of the system.
Whether that's toolkits like X486, QT,
Aqua, TK for Aqua,
applications like TEC and GIMP and PINE,
and languages like Python, Ruby,
which as you've heard are coming
part of our system in the future.
Some of these things may
become part of the system,
all of these things won't.
TEC has an enormous quantity
of fonts and infrastructure,
which probably won't ever be
appropriate for the base system.
But you know that you can get it and run
it on your system in a nice seamless way.
Here's an example of
GIMP running in X11 on Mac OS X.
You can do it,
it's not what we consider the
most ideal user interface,
but if you need GIMP, it's there,
it works.
And there's people working
to port the GTK toolkit to
Mac OS X so it can run natively,
which would be great.
And across all the standards,
all sorts of stuff for
networking and file systems,
directory services, our goal,
as you heard at the keynote on Monday,
is to get Mac OS X to talk to everything.
We don't pretend to live
in a Mac-only world.
We're not trying to
push Mac-only standards.
When we innovate in
areas like rendezvous,
we want to make them available to the
entire community in order to make these
things as industry standard as possible,
so you get all these benefits of
interoperability and connectivity.
[Transcript missing]
We're also investing heavily
in industrial strength
encryption technology.
If you were at the previous session,
you heard about the
Common Data Security Architecture,
an open group standard implemented
from the ground up in Mac OS X,
also available as open source
for anyone else to leverage.
We support the newest
security architectures,
the AES-128 encryption,
the federal government security standard,
and we can use that for
volumes and folders,
as well as for storing
things like the keychain.
And in addition,
we also work with some interesting
things because we control the hardware,
the software, and the operating system.
So, for example,
we put locks on our cases because we
know that it's easy to open them up,
we want to make it easy for
people to get into them,
we also want to make it hard for
the wrong people to get into them,
so it's designed to be lockable.
Our firmware supports firmware passwords,
which make it difficult for
people to be able to change the
booting into an insecure mode.
Things like that that we try
and do to make sure the system
is as foolproof as possible,
at least under common usage scenarios.
Obviously, no system is totally secure
given enough time and resources,
but we try to solve the
problems that we know about.
More importantly,
we try to solve the common problems
that usually cause problems for people,
so they're not problems for you.
And finally below that
we have the kernel,
which provides the flexibility
of a Mach 3 infrastructure,
which has great portability,
with the compatibility of BSD 4.4.
One of the questions we get a lot is,
"Why did you choose a
BSD foundation?" And it wasn't
just to hire Jordan Hubbard,
although that was a nice benefit.
It was because we found BSD more
compatible with our view of
how we wanted to do things.
Apple's a corporate company,
we sell commercial software,
we have a well-maintained,
trustworthy code base
that we can draw upon.
And we found that the BSD development
model and the licensing terms and
really the culture of their community
fit very well with that view of
having a single repository that
we can maintain and manage well.
And it gives us great compatibility
with what people expected
from a UNIX environment.
However,
the BSD technology didn't really do
the sort of flexibility we needed
for fine-grained process control,
for symmetric multi-processing,
for P-thread supported
at the kernel layer,
things like that.
And so we chose to go with
an OSF-MK version of Mach 3.
The Mach 3 technology had been
used previously at Apple for
other research projects,
has a long history of research in
academia as well as in industry.
And by adopting a hybrid
Mach kernel with the BSD 4.4 kernel,
it gives us a much richer set
of services and capabilities.
It's a much more complex set of processes
than we would get with straight BSD,
but still all the compatibility
we'd want from a BSD environment.
It has its own trade-offs,
but on the whole it's been very useful
for us in getting to where we are by
today with very great threading support
as well as a great UNIX environment.
For those of you who are operating
system researchers out there,
Mach is technically a
microkernel architecture.
However,
we are not using it as a microkernel.
We're welding the Mach and BSD pieces
together as a single process to avoid
most of the performance implications
of traditional Mach 3 implementation.
We didn't just stop there, though.
We took this technology and
enhanced it with Apple innovation.
In particular,
really great support for modern devices,
modern hardware, and modern applications.
So that means things like plug-and-play
drivers for FireWire and USB,
very responsive multimedia systems,
where you can get very guaranteed
latency when you're supporting
things like putting back DVD/video,
the instant sleep/wake that most
of you have seen on our PowerBooks,
and the seamless mobility,
which is being enhanced
with things like Rendezvous.
A lot of this is based on
our I/O Kit technology,
a very powerful
object-oriented infrastructure,
which almost guarantees the drivers
you create will work well in an SMP and
real-time preemptible environment.
So a lot of things you have to worry
about in terms of finding the right
kinds of drivers that support the right
kinds of applications are not issues
in Mac OS X because we ensure that
through our frameworks and technology.
And of course,
as you probably all know by now,
all the stuff that's in the
Darwin layer is pretty much open source.
We have a live open source development
model hosted both at Apple and
more recently at opendarwin.org.
We have over 100,000 people
who've downloaded pieces of
the source code from Apple,
taking advantage of our
open source projects.
And one of the big benefits we get are
security and trust due to peer review.
Our security architecture,
our kernel APIs,
people can go through these things
and determine for themselves if
they have security concerns with it.
They're not reliant on a small
group of experts in a closed room.
It also gives us access to a much broader
community of people to find and fix bugs.
So we're very excited for how people
are working with us to enhance the
performance and security of Darwin,
as well as people who enjoy
hacking on it for their own sake.
At this point,
I want to give you a few of the common
gotchas of people moving to Mac OS X,
through the Darwin Layer experience,
coming from the UNIX environment.
The biggest issues I hear about
are HFS+ and case sensitivity,
the fact that it's almost, but not quite,
POSIX, what happened to their etc.
configuration files,
dealing with things like frameworks,
and how we handle preferences.
So,
the first point here is HFS versus POSIX.
Now, the biggest issue that people notice
when they deal with the HFS+ file
system is HFS+ is case sensitive.
Now, this doesn't mean that Mac OS X as
a whole is case sensitive.
Mac OS X supports multiple file systems.
Some of them are case sensitive
and some of them are not.
Case insensitive.
Sorry.
Thank you for the peanut gallery up here.
Yeah,
this is the case insensitivity in H+
versus the case sensitivity you expect.
I'm getting all confused myself now.
Okay.
You can't have case
duplicates in the same folder,
right?
So if you have a file that says
"Makefile" and another that
says "Makefile" capital "M" and
lowercase "m," they will collide,
and that can cause problems if
you're used to experiencing that.
People have been running this on all
sorts of other operating systems.
We made a choice that this
is a better user experience.
You can run on UFS volumes
if you need to,
but something to be aware of
when you're working on Mac OS X.
We do get some benefits from
HFS+. Very fast searches for
filenames based on B-tree searches.
A couple things to be aware of.
Soft links and hard links are
emulated slightly differently on
Mac OS X and HFS+, than they would
be on a traditional Unix file system.
A soft link, an alias in the HFS+ world,
it can be thought of for a
Unix person as a soft link
backed up by an inode reference.
And so that if the name changes,
it'll sort of figure
out where the file is.
A soft link on HFS+ is limited
as a special form of an
alias which behaves properly.
It's pretty much identical to
a soft link on a UFS volume.
Hard links, however,
have a slightly different implementation
where they basically have to create a
dual alias pointing to a third file.
It does work.
It provides more or less the same
semantics you expect of hard links,
but the performance and some of
the other side effects aren't
quite the same as you might expect.
So if you have something that
relies on soft link and hard links,
it should mostly work,
but you may need to be careful about
it because it's not exactly the same
implementation behind the scenes.
Another thing that's true about
HFS+ is it supports resource forks.
Resource forks were very useful
in the old days when HFS,
the original file system,
didn't support small files very well.
Because of that,
people put information in resource forks.
We consider that a legacy technology.
We don't want people to be
using that going forward,
but it's still there in HFS+
for people who need to use it.
Many older Macintosh applications,
even some of the newer ones,
rely on resource forks for storing
metadata about their application.
There's an API at the
Carbon layer which supports it,
but we don't support it
directly at the lower level,
although there are ways to
access resource forks from the
POSIX APIs if you really need to.
Again, something to be aware of,
for example,
when you're working with Unix utilities,
CP, when you copy a file,
will copy over just the data fork,
not the resource fork.
There's some work going on in the Unix
community on resource forks management.
Maybe that'll change the way these
programs are done in the future,
but that's where we're at today.
So, again, we're not going to be
using resource forks
Another thing about HFS+ is that
it has file system metadata,
in particular type and creator code.
We respect type code.
We recommend people not use creator
code unless they're trying to hard code.
We recommend that application
developers not write the creator code.
We think that should be a user
choice if they want to use creator
metadata in their documents for them
to open with a specific application.
In general,
we support file name extensions as the
best cross-platform way to associate
type information with a document.
You will often see applications on
the Macintosh which do not have or
at least do not show an extension.
That's something to be aware of.
The fact that we're mostly POSIX.
We really try our best to
implement the POSIX API set,
working off the single UNIX specification
version 3 and the antecedent documents.
As we've been working
to sync with FreeBSD,
we've been improving our POSIX support.
There's some thread signaling issues
that we're addressing in Jaguar
to improve per-thread signaling.
Our perspective on POSIX compliance
is that if you need it,
because you have an application
that actually uses it,
and it's missing, it is a bug.
It's a fair bug.
File it, and we'll talk about it.
We're not going to try and fix
every possible POSIX compliance bug.
It's a lot of work for relatively
little benefit in this day and age.
But we want to work with you.
If there's some functionality
that you really wish was there,
it's all in open source there,
we're happy to work with you and see.
People have done open source libraries,
and we've looked at that,
and it's often inspired
future work of our own.
Sometimes we adopt it.
We want to work with you on it,
and we think we're pretty good,
but we know there's a few corner cases,
and we want to keep talking with you
about those to see if we can do better.
Managing Configuration Data.
As most of you know,
in Mac OS 10.1 today,
we don't use any of the /etc.
files, the typical way you manage
configuration data for a UNIX system.
We use a database called NetInfo.
That's currently what we use
as the primary data store.
Moving forward for Jaguar,
we're moving to something
called Open Directory.
Open Directory allows us to have
a much more flexible and open
architecture for managing all
this configuration information.
What we're going to try and do
is move away from sort of the
NetInfo-centric view we have today,
something that's more built
around the LDAP protocol,
which includes the ability
to do flat file support,
currently read-only in Jaguar.
But that's usually the most common
way that people want to do it.
They want to be able to hand-edit their
configuration files and have it just work
in adding users and so forth to Mac OS X.
And with Jaguar, we expect that to be a
fully supported option.
So you don't need to, you know,
use NetInfo if you don't want to.
You can just edit configuration files
and have them work as you would expect.
So you don't need to, you know,
use NetInfo if you don't want to.
You can just edit configuration files
and have them work as you would expect.
On a traditional Unix system.
Feel free to applaud.
I know a few people have been yelling
me about that for quite some time.
We are working to
improve our NIS support.
We don't have any plans
for formal NIS support.
Sun's network information system.
We are working with some open source
developers to see about ways to plug
that in directory services going forward.
We still want to support the idea of a
local database rather than flat files,
although we do use it and allow it.
We think there's benefits to
having a database structure.
We will continue to
support that as a way,
but not the only way for supporting
user configuration information.
Until then, if you need to access NetInfo
data from the command line,
there are tools like NILoad, NIDump,
NICL, the NetInfo command line,
which can be very useful for you if
you're in a command line environment and
you need to access NetInfo functionality.
Another thing that often throws
people is the idea of frameworks.
A framework can be considered
a shared library plus a header.
This is very important for us because it
hides implement details from developers.
For example, the system framework,
which is where most of the
UNIX-related stuff exists,
contains all the standard UNIX libraries
that you tend to have a lot of -l's
on your command line for if you're
doing standard UNIX development.
So the CRUN, TIME, MATH libraries,
CURSES, things like this are all
part of the system framework.
We even include a few aliases
so that if you have -lm,
it doesn't complain that it's not there,
it just knows that it's really just
linking in the system framework.
So usually you never need to
think about it because the system
framework is linked by default for
most command line applications.
But occasionally you'll find something
that isn't where you expect it
to be and you need to dig around
and it's in the system framework.
Preferences.
The typical UNIX way of handling
preferences is to have dot
files in your home directory,
which is fine, and if that's what you're
writing a UNIX application,
it should continue to do that.
However,
Macintosh users expect application
defaults to be in a special
directory called library preferences.
This is important for a couple of things.
One, it's a user-visible place
where people can go there and
manage it in various ways.
But more importantly,
it's part of a search path.
There's the home directory's
library preferences,
there's a local library
and slash library,
there's a network library,
which can be under slash network,
and a system library under
slash system library.
And what this allows us to
do is to have defaults that
scale across multiple domains.
So, for example,
I as an administrator can set the default
browser for my site for all my users,
either by setting it when the
user is created or setting it at a
network or a local library layer.
So it allows people to override those
defaults if they want to in their local,
but still have the concept
of a global library.
So, for example,
I can set the global default value set at
the local network or Apple system level.
Very important for creating
a very flexible way for
specifying user preferences.
The file format is also formalized around
an XML DTD known as a property list,
which makes it easy for you
to edit alternate tools.
So you can go in by hand and
edit a configuration file.
I can't count the number of times where
I had a Mac OS 9 application where
the preferences file was screwed up
and I had no idea what was going on.
Now with Mac OS X,
I can go in at the command line,
fire up Emacs,
go through the XML and say, "Okay,
this is what's screwing me up,"
and just delete it and get rid
of it and move on with my life.
So that's what's happening
at the Darwin layer,
and that's probably what a lot of people
think of as the UNIX nature of Mac OS X.
What I wanted to do,
fairly quickly since most of you
have probably seen this before,
go over some of the higher level
technologies in Mac OS X and
our philosophy behind them,
and what are the benefits
they bring to a UNIX user.
So, in the graphics layer,
there's three key technologies.
The first of them is Quartz,
our 2D graphics engine.
Bottom line, it works with PDF,
it handles pretty much all your fonts,
takes care of printing
and color correction,
all sorts of wonderful things.
The big thing from my perspective is that
it makes PDF a first-class data type.
Pretty much every application
can both render and generate PDF.
If you're like me,
you really hate it when people
send you Word documents,
because you don't always have
a copy of Microsoft Office,
certainly not a legal
copy of Microsoft Office,
on every machine that you work on.
And so by having
PDF documents set around,
you can have legit readers and
send read-only copies to people,
which they can view even if they're
running on Linux or FreeBSD or something,
where they're not really
able to run Office.
OpenGL is the industry
center for 3D rendering.
A lot of great applications
written using OpenGL,
both the game space and the
scientific visualization space.
Apple's really taking a
leadership role in OpenGL.
We're on the architecture review board.
Because we control the
hardware and the software,
there's a small number of card
vendors we work very closely with.
We're really interested in having a
great customer experience and great
performance with our OpenGL applications.
QuickTime is driving
the evolution of MPEG-4,
the new standard for
streaming multimedia.
QuickTime provides a
very rich set of APIs.
There's really nothing like
it on any other platform.
It provides things for managing sound,
images, music,
and all sorts of wonderful,
rich multimedia data types.
All being moved towards
using open standard,
open source protocols in many cases.
And it's also very widely used
on both Macintosh and Windows.
And then the quartz compositor,
of course leading now to Quartz Extreme,
but a very powerful
technology for integrating 2D,
3D, and video in a seamless way,
allowing very rich effects,
allowing a very nice user experience
that preserves what I like to
call the illusion of reality.
You're working with these windows,
they feel like tangible objects.
They don't tear, they don't disappear,
they don't go all outlining on
you when you try to resize them.
They feel real.
And that's part of the illusion
we're trying to create to help
you work at a higher level of
abstraction and not be distracted.
Some of you like looking at bits
being redrawn on the screen,
so maybe it's not as big for you.
We want to try and preserve that for
our graphics customers who want to be
able to live in a much richer world.
One of the questions that comes up
in this context is X11 as a windowing
system in a graphics technology.
X11 is not part of the system.
We made a decision very early
on that X11 did not provide
the sort of font and rendering
support we wanted for our system.
But we wanted to make sure it
was available to our community.
So we worked with a
number of third parties,
people like Tenant Interest Systems,
Powerline USA,
and of course the X46 project,
which does a free open source version,
to make sure that they have
good versions for Mac OS X.
We work with them as much as we
can to help them provide X11-based
solutions for our customers.
And let us focus our
engineering resources on those
things that only we can do:
trying to drive Quartz to the next level,
trying to create a very
rich user environment.
We do highly recommend,
where you have the choice,
to use Aqua-compliant
native GUIs instead.
If you have a third-party application
which is running on multiple
platforms and you have to use X11,
that's fine.
A lot of applications are coming
into the platform because of it.
We embrace those applications.
We're not going to be showing
them as often in keynotes
because they don't look as nice,
but we're still glad to
have them on the platform.
If you have a choice,
you can use Quartz directly for
some graphical implementations.
You can use Glott diffusing OpenGL.
There's TKAqua, which can work with Tcl,
Perl, and Python.
And Trolltex ported the QT toolkit.
So wherever you can,
we try to encourage you to work
at the highest level possible
to get the best user experience,
the most leverage of
native Apple technologies.
But if you need to go down to the metal,
and use legacy technologies,
we want you to have that option.
Frameworks.
Taking this technology and bundling it
up in ways that people have a consistent,
coherent environment creates
a much more productive and
consistent platform for developers.
That's why we have a developer
conference like this,
because there are people who
are Cocoa developers who have
a very rich set of frameworks.
They expect to be there.
They know where it comes from.
They know who the developers are.
So you go to one place and
get your problem solved and be
assured that all your customers
will have it on their system.
Our goal is to really make
sure that you can come onto the
Mac platform from wherever you are,
whether you're a Mac developer, a UNIX,
Linux, or BSD developer,
or a Java developer,
or creating a whole new
application from scratch,
or learning to program,
we want you to be able
to succeed on Mac OS X.
We're on some history here for those
of you who may not be familiar with it.
The legacy environment on
Mac OS X is known as Classic.
Classic is actually based on older
technology coming over from UNIX.
This is a virtual machine called
the Mac Application Environment.
This was used back in the 90s for
people to run Mac applications
on their Sun workstations,
for example.
It was really a virtual machine for UNIX.
We took that,
sliced off the bottom half of that,
and created something
called the Blue Box,
which was used in the Rhapsody
and the Mac OS X 1.0 products.
This allowed you to have Mac applications
on one screen and then your native
applications on another screen,
and you'd swap between the two,
kind of like a virtual
workspace in the Linux world.
And it worked fine for its role there,
but we want to have a better
experience for legacy applications.
So classic applications are those
that are written to the Mac OS 9 APIs.
They make certain assumptions about
being able to own the entire machine.
And we want them to be able
to do that so they can run.
We don't want them to try and take
over the machine because we've
got a UNIX kernel underneath.
So we created this idea of a
classic environment which can
run Mac OS 9 applications more
or less seamlessly with Mac OS X.
But you don't usually
need to think about it.
It's also important that you can have
this either as a separate disk image or
as another volume on the same partition.
In many cases it should be more
or less invisible that you're
running a classic application.
We hope that you don't
need to do this very often,
but often you will have an application
which is not being updated at all.
The developer or the company
is no longer in that business,
and we want you to be able to access and
run those applications if you need to.
However, we don't really want you to be
running these things and certainly
not writing any of these things.
We'd rather have you work
on something called Carbon.
Carbon is a way to optimize
existing Mac OS 9 applications
to take advantage of Mac OS X.
An example here of Mathematica,
a great example of a
Carbon application for Mac OS X.
And Carbon is the easiest way to
bring your existing Mac applications.
Basically it's the way that
things like Office came.
They took their Mac OS 9 application,
they modernized it,
removed a few legacy APIs,
adopted a big data types,
adopted an API that was sure to be
reentrant so you could have multiple
processes running on the same disk.
And then they now have the option
of being able to run applications
on both Mac OS 9 and Mac OS X.
Obviously we want developers to
be focusing on Mac OS X because
that's where the money is,
as well as where our efforts are.
But people who need to deliver
applications onto legacy systems,
there is a Carbon lib that
allows them to do that.
And this is what's been used by
major ISVs to get to Mac OS X.
Office, for example,
Mathematica did a great job
of taking their Unix backend,
which was their strongest backend,
and their Mac frontend,
which was their best looking frontend,
and combining them into a single
application that ran on Mac OS X.
And taking advantage then of
Mac OS X technologies like anti-aliasing
to deliver an even superior customer
experience than they ever had before.
Of course,
one of the things we're focusing
a lot on these days is Cocoa,
which is really the easiest
way to create fully native,
Aqua-compliant Mac OS X applications.
You can also do all that in Carbon,
but it's more work.
And for those of us who are lazy like me,
we like the idea of Cocoa.
And Cocoa provides a very rich
suite of pre-built widgets,
makes it very easy to create
Aqua-compliant front ends,
has a very robust
object-oriented architecture.
One of the great things about
Cocoa is that it's often very easy
to integrate C or C++ back ends,
or even command line utilities,
into rich applications.
And in the next session,
you'll be seeing some
examples of doing that.
It also takes full advantage
of all the Mac OS X tools and
provides a great alternative
to traditional UNIX interfaces.
This is an example we showed
at Macworld in January.
We were running around saying, "You know,
we need to have a great demo showing how
easy it is to bring UNIX code over to
Mac OS X." We really wanted to stress
the UNIX nature of Mac OS X this year.
So we called up one of our friends,
at TweakWaves, an animation studio known
for The Perfect Storm.
And there's a guy there who was like,
"Mr.
Waves.
This guy's life is creating
waves." He has this piece of very
sophisticated custom software that
generates these wonderful wave
algorithms that are used in movies.
And this is what it looked
like before there was Cocoa.
This is what his environment was,
sitting in front of a nice,
gray pudding-like simulation of waves
on a high-powered SGI workstation.
And we said, "We've only got two weeks.
Can you get us something ready
for Macworld January?" He goes,
"Well, I don't know,
but I'll give it a try."
So he got a copy of Mac OS X,
brought it over.
It took a few days.
He goes, "Wow, this is great.
I have a whole week left before the demo.
What else can I do?" He said, "Well,
why don't I try and take advantage
of it to do new things I could
never do before?" So he added
texture mapping using QuickTime.
He added dynamic user interface controls.
He drew a background using Maya.
And now it went from looking
like that to looking like this.
And this is a sort of
productivity enhancement.
Yes, technically,
you could have done this
on a UNIX system with X11.
And Qt.
But you never would have
because it was too much work.
With Mac OS X, I honestly believe this as
a long-time UNIX hacker,
it's as easy to create a
good-looking GUI as it is to
create a traditional command line
interface for your application.
So do so.
It gives you much wider visibility.
It makes it easier for you to
remember how to use it when you
come back to it three months later.
And it gives something that's
a much better user experience.
And we think using Cocoa technology
is a great way to really spice up
your existing UNIX applications.
One thing that people often ask about
with regard to Cocoa is Objective-C.
Objective-C is the native
language used for Cocoa.
It was invented by Brad Cox,
one of the great innovators in our field.
Used in Next Step,
which is where we inherited from.
The basic idea of Cocoa was
that every object invocation,
everything inside those funny brackets,
is a function called
Objective-C message send.
Which basically goes through a class
information to do lookups to methods.
It's actually not that
much rocket science.
The runtime is all there in Open Source.
Nothing to be afraid of.
It's actually more dynamic than
what you typically find in C++,
but in some ways it's also simpler.
Objective-C tends to take
advantage of weak typing,
although you can also use strong typing.
In particular, Objective-C,
very much like Java,
has single inheritance
of implementations.
You get multiple types of interfaces.
We call them protocols,
Java calls them interfaces.
C++ you can consider
a pure abstract class.
But a lot of the concepts you find
in Java are actually borrowed from,
James Gobsling was here yesterday and he
actually admitted that some of the ideas
like protocols were ripped off directly
from Objective-C when they invented Java.
So if you understand Java,
you can probably understand a lot
of the concepts of Objective-C,
but unlike Java, it is all native code,
has seamless integration with C and C++,
and we think it's very useful for
the types of desktop applications
that Cocoa is designed for.
So we encourage you to check it out,
and there's lots of sessions on that,
and it's actually not that big of a deal.
Once you get used to
seeing brackets in places,
it's actually a very rapid way to
just spice up your existing C code
with some nice graphical front ends.
Of course,
Cocoa is also accessible from Java if you
prefer a Java programming environment.
And of course,
if you just want to write straight
Java cross-platform applications,
we do a really great job of
supporting Java on the desktop.
At Java 1, Ahsan and lots of other people
really acknowledge how we're really
taking the initiative in driving
Java forward on the desktop.
We made sure that every copy of
Mac OS X we ship includes a fully
compliant version of Java 2.
Not just compliant,
but also using the latest
client VM based on hotpot
technology for best performance.
We've worked on adding a
very native look and feel.
In many cases,
it's very difficult to tell whether an
application is a native Cocoa application
or a Java swing application.
We've done some interesting innovations,
basically the idea of
shared libraries for Java,
which reduce the memory footprint
and decrease startup time.
Some other enhancements
like 2D acceleration,
taking advantage of hardware,
and working very closely with our
third-party partners to make sure
we have a wide range of tools
and utilities that you'd expect
for Java running on Mac OS X.
So if you're doing Java development,
we really see that Mac OS X,
because of its UNIX affinity
and its great support for Java,
is really the best place to be
running Java on the desktop.
Last but not least, on top of all this,
we have this idea of Aqua.
Of course, the Aqua user interface
that you've seen many times.
A few comments about
Aqua from a UNIX perspective.
Aqua, in some sense,
is sort of a state of mind.
It's not just a single
technology or a single idea.
It covers a wide range
of different layers.
In UNIX, you'd have a toolkit,
you'd have a window manager,
you'd have themes, you may have several
desktop applications.
We consider all of that Aqua.
It's sort of the gestalt
user experience of Mac OS X.
And there's also a philosophy about it.
One of the big things about Mac OS X is
we really insist that all normal usage
should be accessible via the GUI.
Everything we consider a feature that
we want a customer to be able to do-- is
Jordan running because I'm saying that?
No.
Some of the engineers coming
from a UNIX background are scared
at the idea of having to create
a GUI for all their services.
I'm sure that's not
why Jordan is leaving.
Coffee.
But one of the things that
we really try and discipline
ourselves at Apple is to say,
"It's not a feature until it has a GUI."
One of the problems when you're running
on a typical UNIX environment is you say,
"Well, I can do the same thing
on the command line.
It's too much effort.
I'm not going to bother to do that last
little bit and make it fully accessible."
Because we are a company where we pay
our engineers and we have standards,
we're able to enforce that,
which guarantees that the full
experience and use of the system
can be accessible from the GUI.
And we think that gives us a much
more complete and comprehensive
system that you're likely to see
out of non-commercial efforts.
There's some services
that we're working on.
There's some services that
are provided as part of Aqua,
things like the Finder, the Desktop,
the Dock, the top-level Menu Bar.
There's also widgets, the idea of Sheets,
the Taskbar that you see on a
lot of applications like Mail,
Drawers, a lot of these things are things
that you may not be familiar with
coming from a UNIX background.
We encourage you to
play with these things.
Interface Builder, particularly Cocoa,
make it very easy to add
these to your application.
Start thinking creatively about
ways to design your application.
We'll be having the
Open Source Design Awards tomorrow night,
and we have a category
just for Open Source Ports.
People who've taken existing
software and made it look and feel
like a native Mac OS X application,
trying to recognize the work
they're doing to try and go
beyond what's traditionally
been possible in that community.
There is a philosophical issue
that's probably worth mentioning that
sometimes strikes people a little
ajar when they deal with Mac OS X.
Mac OS X,
we try to think about things being
customizable for the user environment,
but not replaceable.
In the UNIX world, everything is usually
expected to be replaceable.
You can replace the Windows system,
the Window Manager theme,
all sorts of different things,
and drop and plug in and often write
your own versions of different things.
While that's really a lot
of fun for developers,
it tends to be a nightmare for end
users who don't know what system
the thing was developed to run in.
It's often quite a challenge
for system administrators,
documentation writers,
and things like that.
So because of the Macintosh philosophy,
we try to have at least one clear,
coherent way with some
variations around it,
but still a very well-defined,
consistent user experience.
So I would encourage you,
if you're trying to create
a Mac OS X application,
to create a mass-market
Mac OS X application that you
really sort of buy into that
mindset and try to make things as
consistent and coherent as possible.
There is certainly room
for experimentation.
You can actually, because it is all based
on UNIX technology,
plug in and replace various pieces
of it and write your own finder.
And that's really great
for a research project,
but we don't think that's going
to be a normal customer scenario.
So when you create applications,
try to leverage the higher-level
toolkits and conform to the
standards as best as you can.
In order to help you do that,
we provide a rich suite
of developer tools,
which themselves are great examples
of powerful software built on
top of open source technology.
There's all the command line tools
you'd expect from a UNIX environment,
based on standard technology,
pretty much all available is open source.
We have a rich suite of visual tools,
really trying to do professional
quality development.
We faced a choice when we did Mac OS X.
All the UNIX developers were
asking for developer tools.
We could have just given them the command
line open source tools and charged for
the developer tools at the GUI level.
We made a conscious decision not to,
because we really want our
open source developers,
people who are used to using
GCC and things like that,
to create great, rich, GUI,
Aqua quality applications.
We actually believe that they can.
A lot of people think that UNIX people
can't create good looking applications
because of what they've seen.
But I think a lot of it is
that they haven't been given
the right set of tools,
they haven't been given the right set
of inspiration to which to work from.
We really want to see
something like that happen.
We're going to be doing
some really gorgeous,
best of breed applications created
using open source GUI technologies,
open source technologies
using GUIs on Mac OS X.
There's a whole bunch of these,
there's all sorts of courses on them.
The real reason for this list is to
show you there's a bunch of different
apps for all sorts of things.
Get in there, play around with them,
read the documentation,
realize that this is really a very
useful way of doing a lot of things.
Most of them provide support even
for command line applications.
if you need to do things like that.
A couple of things that come up in this
space is the object file format issues.
A lot of people in the open
source UNIX world are used to
a binary format called ELF.
We from Mac OS X use a
functionality called Maco.
They were developed at roughly the same
time in slightly parallel locations.
They're more or less
functionally equivalent.
There's not anything that I'm aware
of that you really can't do in
one that you can do in the other.
But Mac OS X is really tuned
for development of Maco.
The Maco file format is what
we use for all of our tools,
all of our performance work,
all of our optimization work.
We encourage you to use Maco
and get used to it in Mac OS X.
The names of some tools are
slightly different than their
analogues in the ELF world,
but it's usually not too hard
to figure out what those are.
You'll often hear people talk
about something called CFM.
CFM or PEF was the way that dynamic
libraries and loadable modules and binary
files were handled in the Mac OS X world.
It is supported on Mac OS X as
a legacy technology.
But some of you may have
heard that that's not really
our goal moving forward.
We want people to be delivering all
their applications Mac OS X native,
which means Maco.
Occasionally people will ask, you know,
is a Carbon application native or is it
only Cocoa applications that are native?
And the real answer is anything
that is Maco is native on Mac OS X.
And Cocoa is always Maco.
Carbon may be Maco or may be
CFM based on how it was built.
And so there's different issues
that people have to worry
about when they deal with that.
But hopefully you're coming
from more or less a clean slate.
And a Unix background will be
writing directly to Maco and
able to take advantage of the
Cocoa libraries for your GUI.
As part of that is our dynamic library
support based on a technology called
DYLD versus the more traditional
DLOpen you find on most UNIX systems.
They're sort of similar, but not quite.
In many cases you'll have
to either create a wrapper,
there is a DL-compat library
that's available as open source,
the open office people use it,
which gives you more or less
equivalent functionality,
or you can just use an ifdef,
it's usually not a big deal.
But in particular I think the one
specific area where there's a semantic
mismatch is in the next symbol field.
So if you have a DL dynamic load
library which expects to iterate
through symbols in a linear fashion,
that may cause some challenges
and some other issues that you
face when going to Mac OS X.
So there's a few things to be
wary of when you go to Mac OS X.
If you use some exotic thread
signaling issues or you do a
lot of dynamic library stuff,
you may not have a
perfectly trivial port.
On the other hand,
it is still a straightforward library.
forward port and it's something that
we definitely encourage you to do.
Of course,
you've probably seen by now all
the different developer tools,
Project Builder,
which can be used as a great
front end on top of GDB and GCC,
as well as Java and other languages.
The big thing about
Project Builder that's important,
a couple of things.
One is it abstracts you away
from having to worry about where
things are on the command line and
which libraries to link against.
But the real important
thing is that it creates the
packaging format for Mac OS X.
Mac OS X creates all
these application bundles,
which are a very well-defined
way of laying out resources and
images and things like that.
So if you want to create
a Mac OS X application,
you want to use Project Builder.
You can still use it from the
command line when you want
to actually do your builds,
which can be very useful
for a number of scenarios.
But the GUI makes it a lot
easier to create a fully
Mac OS X compliant application.
Interface Builder,
learn to love Interface Builder.
It's a fantastic way to create
great Aqua-compliant interfaces.
If you're using Cocoa,
you can do a lot of the hard work
of your application structure.
by wiring up objects
inside Interface Builder.
And of course,
the more recent addition to the
family is AppleScript Studio,
which from my perspective
is a way of combining Cocoa,
Interface Builder,
and Project Builder with
the AppleScript language.
The AppleScript language was
developed out of HyperScript and
HyperTalk and HyperCard and all
that family of developments for
rapid development and prototyping.
It's a very different philosophical
beast than a UNIX scripting language.
A UNIX scripting language is usually
coming out of a programming mentality,
trying to find an easier,
faster way to do programming-type
tasks in rapid iteration.
The AppleScript language was designed
explicitly for end users to try
to find a natural English language
way to accomplish certain tasks.
And you can tell this by sort of the
average word length of a UNIX command
versus an AppleScript command.
Something that'll be about 25 words for
an AppleScript thing will be about 25
characters in a UNIX scripting language.
The other way I think about the
difference between the two is
that AppleScript is designed
for working with applications.
It's firmware and large data objects.
It's not just about images
and things like that.
Whereas the UNIX command line is
really optimized for dealing with text.
And because of that,
they have different semantic
constructs and also different
applicable usage scenarios.
One of the more interesting things,
I went to the web services
framework session before lunch.
And the person wrote a nice
AppleScript application and he
called down to a UNIX command
line to format the date for him.
Because the UNIX has all these really
rich formatting and text handling
capabilities built into the command line.
And so he just calls down to that,
gets a string, and then passes it off.
And then he calls it off
to do more sophisticated
AppleScript kinds of things.
AppleScript is really great.
One, it allows you to tap into the
Aqua widgets and the Cocoa frameworks
as well as calling down to UNIX scripts.
And more importantly,
it has a very powerful remote
technology called Apple Events.
It allows you to send messages
to other applications.
Most Mac OS X applications,
certainly all the good ones,
have a dictionary which allows
them to be AppleScriptable.
This creates a language that
you can execute commands against
that are understood by all the
different Mac OS X applications.
It's really great for application
control and network workflows.
Chances are the newspaper you purchased,
if you bought a newspaper
in the last week,
had some portion of it that was
automated by AppleScript running
on the production side.
Whether it's laying out
TV guides or formatting weather
maps or things like that.
Because it's very great for
automating repetitive tasks
involving GUI applications.
One of the exciting things
about Apple Events is it
all supports web services.
And as you've been hearing a lot,
there's a lot of rich
technologies in Mac OS X.
And they're particularly easy to do
at a high level from AppleScript.
Because it's built around this
whole idea of doing high level
messaging between applications.
It is even possible to call
AppleScript from the command line.
There's a command called osascript which
can evoke any OpenScript architecture,
OSA compliant scripting language,
in this case AppleScript.
It is possible to create OSA versions
of Perl and other languages.
If you're interested in
working on an OSA plugin,
for other languages, please talk to me.
We'd love to get you hooked up with
the engineering teams and enable other
languages to tap into the functionality.
We're not bigots in the
scripting language space.
We like having lots of scripting
languages on the platform.
AppleScript is our language.
We put the most resources on it.
We'd love to help you take
your favorite languages,
whatever they are,
and plug into the power of Mac OS X.
We also support a wide
range of third-party tools,
whether you're doing Java programming
or BASIC or C++ programming.
There's often a tool available for a
third party which is more suited to
your particular application space.
We try to have as many tools
as we can running in Mac OS X.
This is JBuilder from Borland.
A lot of people feel that it
looks much better than JBuilder
ever did on any other platform,
but it's still the same pure Java binary,
tools like Real Basic,
MetroWorks Code Warrior,
and all sorts of great open-source tools
appearing all the time on Mac OS X.
So we really want to make sure
that you can have the best
environment possible with whatever
tools you're comfortable with.
One of the tools that I personally
think is one of the best things
available on Mac OS X is WebObjects 5.1,
which is a very powerful
development environment as well as
deployment environment for creating
three-tier web applications,
whether they're talking to
HTML or Java interfaces.
It does a lot of the hard
work of database mapping,
page layout, and lets you have a nice,
rich experience for
designing user interfaces.
It can work with either
standard Java runtimes or on
top of other J2E app servers.
If you're doing Java development,
if you're doing web-based development,
we really encourage you
to check out WebObjects.
We support the traditional
open-source stuff,
Tomcat and PHP and stuff like that,
which is often great
for certain projects.
But if you're creating very complex,
scalable three-tier web solutions,
we really encourage you to
check out WebObjects as well,
which is also a cross-platform
Java application.
Documentation has been a hot issue
for a lot of people for a lot of time.
We've been making a major
push on Darwin documentation.
There's a number of different
kinds of documentation available.
We have all these demand pages,
which are viewable from
Project Builder or from the shell.
There's a lot of parts of inside
Mac OS X kernel programming which will
be of interest to Darwin developers.
There's the new
Bringing UNIX Applications
to Mac OS X Guide,
a preliminary draft of
which was posted this week.
We encourage you to look at
it and send your feedback.
The URL will be on the URL Farm.
It's fairly easy to find from
the Mac OS X documentation page
or from the Darwin page itself.
There's some specific tools
documentation that UNIX developers
might find particularly interesting.
Particularly all the
stuff about our compiler,
our assembler, the preprocessor,
which is different than the traditional
preprocessing in many UNIX systems.
And also some of the quirks
and intricacies of the
Mac OS X runtime architecture.
So in summary,
I really want to hopefully give you
a feel for what we're doing with
Mac OS X from a UNIX perspective.
We really think this is the dream
machine that everyone who's been
running UNIX will want to have.
Something that looks like a PowerBook G4
that can run mainstream UNIX,
has a Mac interface, Microsoft Office,
standard Java 2, free tools to go.
And we really hope
that you'll go with it.
Thank you very much.
[Transcript missing]
Jason from Developer Relations will
be coordinating that for us.
Last thing I forgot,
there is one more slide about more
information from the developer page.
Also,
the Mac OS X downloads page has a great
source of open source applications
like X11 and hopefully soon OpenOffice.
And some great mailing lists.
There's a UNIX porting
mailing list we've set up for
discussions of issues you face,
either bringing stuff over to the
Darwin layer or adding GUI stuff
on top of UNIX applications.
Stepwise has a great
source of information,
a lot of downloads and other techniques.
And then the Slashdot site has
a new Apple section in the last
month which has some great news.